# Self-Fulfillment Through Organic Learning

Edited by Mark Reese

_Dr. Feldenkrais presented this talk at the San Diego Mandala Conference in 1981. The conference that year focused on holistic health and longevity. Mark Reese (1951–2006), part of the original group of students Dr. Feldenkrais trained in the United States, arranged for Dr. Feldenkrais to present at the conference and later edited the talk for publication. Reese went on to become one of the most influential and articulate members of his generation of Feldenkrais teachers and was responsible for training large numbers of new Feldenkrais teachers worldwide. Mark has written a much-anticipated biography of Feldenkrais, Moshe Feldenkrais: A Life in Movement, which will be published in 2011.—Ed._

I USUALLY DON’T MAKE IT TO CONFERENCES. I TALK TO PEOPLE and I feel like talking to friends. As a lecturer, I’m not a lecturer. I just talk to people who would like to learn something. I’m not an ordinary teacher either, but a peculiar sort of teacher who is interested not in his teaching but in what people learn. Therefore, I never, never wrote or prepared a lecture in my life. There are many people of the Feldenkrais GUILD® here who know me and will witness that for four or eight years of teaching I never prepared anything. This time I wrote a paper, and of course, I don’t need it.

I wrote this because I didn’t know what I undertook, that the name of my talk should be “Self-Fulfillment Through Organic Learning.” About “organic learning” I could talk without preparing, but “self-fulfillment”—what is self-fulfillment? I never can do anything with abstract notions without talking for days and getting nowhere. I need concrete things that are plausible to everyone, that you and I can understand, and that we can touch, see, or hear. After that, when we have some common experience, we can understand one another when we use language. Otherwise, it’s impossible. I can say a word like “holistic” and you understand God knows what by that word. What is it? I learned the word “holistic” like Dr. Lomas said yesterday, from Field Marshal Smuts’1 book. Since then I have seen the word so used and misused that I don’t know what it means anymore.

I must begin with concrete things. What is self? What is fulfillment? What is organic learning? If we don’t know what we are talking about, we will get nowhere. So first let’s see: What is a self? There are four and a half billion selves, and there are not two of them equal, neither in their fingerprints, nor in their immune system. We cannot transplant things from one person to another; they are individuals, each one absolutely unique in his own right. That’s a self. This is a simple sort of thing. But there are probably two hundred billion selves like that in the world because all the animals are also selves. What are common to all these selves are very fundamental biological quantities or qualities. First, self-reproduction. Without self-reproduction no species can exist. All species that exist, including man, must be able to reproduce themselves. The next is self-maintenance. There is no animal, no bacteria, no creature in the world which can exist without absorbing either oxygen, or nitrogen, like the anaerobic bacteria. And water is essential to all life, and food. Without self-maintenance it’s inconceivable that any species could exist for a long time. In fact, maintenance is much more drastic than self-reproduction because self-reproduction occurs no more than once or twice a year for most mammals. But maintenance—if you don’t breathe for two, three minutes, you won’t breathe forever after. Self-preservation is even more drastic: not to be eaten up by a lion or a boa constrictor; falling from a rock, or a high mountain, or a precipice. This can be a question of a second and you’re not there. These three “selfs”—self-preservation, self-maintenance, and self-reproduction—are common to all animals; they have nothing to do with human beings alone. None of these three selfs can be satisfied without self-propulsion, or movement, or action. You can’t self-reproduce without movement; if you don’t move nothing will happen. And you cannot get your food, air, and water without moving. You cannot avoid dangers and preserve yourself without running away, attacking, or being careful in the movement you do—whatever you learned how to do so you could survive. Although this is common to all living creatures on this earth, the human being is complicated by extraordinary things like thinking, feeling, sensing, consciousness, awareness. What are these things? With what are we going to deal? Awareness, consciousness. Consciousness is also common to most animals, but to such a minor degree, and the difference with which we are endowed with it is so great that you can say it’s a different quality. When I ask most people why they have to have consciousness, they say it’s enough to be awake. You sleep, you’re awake; what do you want to have consciousness for? And in fact, what do you do with your consciousness? What is it? Isn’t being awake enough? Well, it turns out that it isn’t, because you yourself can see through personal experience; for instance, you can wake up and not know where you are, and not know whether you are awake or not. You can take a child out of his bed and take him to urinate because you want the bed to remain dry. The child gets up and obviously he does feel that he’s getting up. He’s awake and he’s doing something and going back to bed, but he is not conscious; he doesn’t know anything and he doesn’t even remember that he was lifted out of bed.

